<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- Building Schutz. --> 
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.5//EN"
                  "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd"
  [ <!ENTITY schutz "Schutz">
    <!ENTITY ldl0 "Ldl0">
    <!ENTITY ldl1 "Ldl1">
    <!ENTITY ast "AST">
    <!ENTITY repo "repository">
    <!ENTITY lbe "Lbe">
  ]
>

<article id="schutz-building" lang="en">
  <articleinfo>
  <title> Building &schutz;. </title> 
    <author> <firstname>Rodney</firstname> <surname>Bates</surname> </author>
    <date> 2020-12-23 </date>  
  </articleinfo>

  <sect1 id="prereq">
    <title> Prerequisites </title> 

    <para>
      &schutz; is mostly written in Modula-3, plus some common linux
      tools and some specialized languages that it contains implementations
      of.  It has so far only been developed to build and run on linux
      systems and only compiled for AMD64_LINUX and LINUXLIBC Modula-3
      target systems.
    </para>
        
    <para>
      Recently, it has been compiled only using the
      packedVars branch of the Modula-3 CM3 compiler, which can be
      found at github.com/modula3/cm3.  It will probably be compilable
      by some earlier Modula-3 compilers, but the packedVars branch contains
      improvements that, at least, will make it occupy less RAM.
    </para>
  
    <para>
      You will need:
    </para>

    <itemizedlist>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        The Bash or similar shell, with commands mkdir, cd, rm, cp,
        source, ls, cat, and ln.
      </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
      <para>
        Addtional tools sed, awk, sort, diff, grep, date, and /lib/cpp.
      </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
      <para>
        A Modula-3 compiler named cm3, including shipped libraries
        m3core and libm3.
      </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
      <para>
        Compiled and shipped libraries from the comm and ui groups of the
        Modula-3 distribution.  Not all of these are needed, but the exact
        list is unascertained.  Compiling ui will require installation of
        the X11 Athena widget development library.
        On Ubuntu and derived Linux distributions, package libxaw7
        and libxaw7-dev should suffice. 
      </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
      <para>
        A copy of the &schutz; distribution, which can be found at
        github.com/RodneyBates/schutz/master.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

  </sect1>
  
  <sect1 id="steps">
    <title> Build steps </title>
    <para>
      Directory paths in the following are relative to the root
      of the of the git repository, i.e., parallel to its
      <literal>.git</literal>
      directory.  The following commands are all issued in the
      <literal>./scripts</literal> subdirectory. 
    </para>

    <para>
      If the &repo; is not entirely fresh, issue
      <literal>veryclean.sh</literal>.
    </para>

    <para>
      Edit ./sethostdep.sh to have the Modula-3 target you are
      building on.  There is, so far, no automatic detection
      or setting of this. 
    </para>

    <para>
      Issue 
      <literal>fullboot.sh</literal>.
      This will go through an elaborate bootstrap process, involving
      other scripts, creation of directories,
      compilations, execution of compiled programs, 
      generation of souce code and internal data,
      checking for convergence, etc.
      Do not panic over messages about states not being LALR.

      At the end, this will have created directory ./boot and many
      files within.  It will have built and shipped library libschutzcommon,
      built executables LdlBoot and LdlBatch in ./boot, and executable
      &lbe; in ./edit/AMD64_LINUX (substitute your target system).
    </para>

    <para>
      LdlBoot is used only in the bootstrap process.  You will have no
      further need of it unless you do development work on the process.
      LdlBatch adds languages to &schutz;.  You will not need it either,
      unless you do development on a supported language or add a new
      language.  &lbe; is the built editor.  At this stage, each
      of these executables supports
      only ldl0, a primitive language definition language used only
      during bootstrapping.
    </para>

    <para>
      Issue
      <literal>AddLdl1.sh</literal>.
      This will alter LdlBatch and &lbe;, to additionally support ldl1,
      the more general language definition language used in &schutz;.
    </para>

    <para>
      Issue
      <literal>AddM3.sh</literal>.
      This will alter &lbe;, to additionally support Modula-3.
    </para>

    <para>
      You are done. 
    </para>

  </sect1>      


</article><!-- Building Schutz. -->

