<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- Schutz data structures. --> 
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.5//EN"
                  "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd"
  [ <!ENTITY schutz "Schutz">
    <!ENTITY ldl0 "Ldl0">
    <!ENTITY ldl1 "Ldl1">
    <!ENTITY ast "AST">
    <!ENTITY est "EST">
    <!ENTITY varterm "VarTerm">
  ]
>

<article id="schutz-datastructure" lang="en">
  <articleinfo>
  <title> The &schutz; Data Structure   </title> 
    <author> <firstname>Rodney</firstname> <surname>Bates</surname> </author>
    <date> 2020-11-25 </date>  
  </articleinfo>

  <sect1 id="intro">
    <title> Introduction</title>

    <para>
      The primary data structure in &schutz;, which represents code
      being edited, is called an &est;, for <emphasis>Extended Syntax Tree</emphasis>.
      Imbedded within an &est; is an &ast;, abstractly viewable as a standard
      <emphasis>abstract syntax tree</emphasis>, with some significant representational
      differences.
    </para>

    <para>
      For each language, there is a single flat space of token
      codes, of several kinds.  The lowest numbered are common
      to all languages and have special purposes.  These are
      declared in LbdStd.i3.  For each langauge, there are
      several categories of codes.
      <emphasis>constant terminals</emphasis>.
    </para>

    <para>
    </para>

    <para>
      In a usual ast, a leaf node corresponds to a lexical token that,
      for parsing purposes, is a terminal in the grammar of the language,
      but has additional information attached, for uses beyond parsing.   
      Identifiera and string literals are typical examples.  In &schutz;,
      these are called &varterm;s, for <emphasis> variable terminal </emphasis>.
      These are represented by a node containing the token code and a
      pointer to atom of the character string.
    </para>

    <para>
      In a conventional ast, each significant syntactic construct,
      e.g., an if-statement or a subrange-type, is represented by an
      interior node that contains an ast token code denoting which
      particular construct it represents, and child subtrees that
      represent the components it is constructed from.  The children
      are, in general, subtrees of unbounded size and complexity.
      Most such children are constrained to be a subtree rooted by a
      particular subset of the ast tokens.  Each ast token implies a
      possibly different list of children and their kinds, and the ast
      node is often statically typed with this list.
    </para>

    <para>
      A &schutz; est is similar.  Each interior est node has an ast token,
      and some of its leaf nodes are &varterm;s.  But there are possibly other
      children, besides ests and &varterm;s.  These are called mods.
      for <emphasis>modifier</emphasis>.  They represent nonsyntactic content such
      as comments, error messages, etc.  Moreover, the children are stored
      in a runtime variable list. 
    </para>

    <para>
      Displaying content texually entails a variation
      on <emphasis>paramodulation</emphasis>.  There is a language-dependent set
      of rewrite rules, one for each ast token.  Each rule gives a
      list of what, in a paramodulation system, are
      called <emphasis>variables</emphasis> that match the ast children of the
      ast node.  Interspersed among these are other items that are
      to be inserted into the textual equivant of the est node.
      Most commonly, ond of these is a terminal symbol of fixed spelling,
      called a constterm, for <emphasis>constant terminal</emphasis>.  A constterm
      correspond to a delimiter token, such as "IF", or ";", that
      brackets and separates the textual representations of the subtrees.
    </para>

    <para>
      In the theory, paramodulation means rewriting the tree by systematic
      application of such rules.  In &schutz;, the thus-rewritten tree is
      never physically constructed, but remains conceptual.  Several
      est traverse algorithms alternate between traversing an est node
      and traversing its rewrite rule, performing appropriate actions
      on components of each.  
    </para>

    <para>
      In &schutz;, the rewrite rules of a language are orginally
      specified textually, in ldl1, by the language definer.  The
      rules are called fsrules, for <emphasis>format syntax</emphasis> rules.  Ldl
      processing of these converts each to a linked tree data
      structure, which is loaded into RAM as part of the supporting
      data for a language.  This is called an fstree, <emphasis>format
       syntax</emphasis> tree.  The fstree for an ast node is located
      directly by the node's token code.  Nodes of an fstree that
      call for inserting a constterm are called <emphasis>insertion tokens</emphasis>
      and are leaf nodes.  
    </para>

    <para>
      There are several additional complications possible in a format
      syntax rule/tree.  First, along the leaf nodes, there may also be
      <emphasis>line breaks</emphasis>.  These specify that a new line is to be
      begun where the line break occurs.  The inserted new line is
      indented by a dynamically computed amount inherited from above,
      plus a static amount attached to the line break.
    </para>

    <para>
      There are three conditions controlling whether a line break is
      actually taken.  All line breaks in a range of textual material
      have the same condition.  A group of <emphasis>vertical</emphasis> line
      breaks are always inserted.  A group of <emphasis>horizontal</emphasis> line
      break is inserted only if the entire range of textual material
      they belong to fits on the current line.  Otherwise, none of
      them is taken.  a <emphasis>fill</emphasis> line break, independently of the
      others in its range, is taken if the material from it to the
      following (fill) line break or the end of the range fits on the
      line.  Thus sections of material delimited by fill line breaks
      are treated the way words are filled by a work processor.
    </para>

    <para>
      The relevant range of textual material, in the simple case, is
      the entire fsrule.  Alternatively, the rule can be broken into
      subsections, either nested or disjoint, each of which has a
      different condition on its line breaks.  
    </para>

    <para>
      An fsrule/fstree can also have subsections that are conditionally
      used in their entirity.  These are controlled by any of an extensive
      set of predicates on properies of both the children and the Est node.
      For example, this can be used to selectivly insert required parentheses
      around a subexpression of lower precedence than the est node itself.  
    </para>

    <para>
      The leaf nodes of an fsrule are numbered sequentially,
      left-to-right.  These are called fsnos, for <emphasis>format syntax
      numbers</emphasis>.  They are used to match fstree leaf nodes to est
      leaf nodes.  Each est leaf also has a fsno stored it it.  This
      will be equal to the fsno of the fsrule leaf that corresponds to
      it.
    </para>

    <para>
      In addition to ast children, all of
      the modifier children of the est, have a fsno too.  This attaches the
      modifier to an ast child.  Each kind of modifier is statically either
      <emphasis>leading</emphasis> or <emphasis>trailing</emphasis>, the former being more
      common.  Every leaf of an fstree matches a range, possibly
      empty, of est children all with the same fsno as the fstree
      leaf.  This will include zero or more leading modifiers, an
      optional est child, and zero or more trailing modifiers.
    </para>

    <para>
      The est child can occur only for a &varterm;, but even then is
      optional.  It could be optional in the abstract grammer of the
      language, e.g. an initial value expression of a variable declaration.
      It can also be removed in various cases involving textual editing,
      syntax error repair suggestions, etc.
    </para>

    <para>
      Insertion tokens are backwards in the sense that they are absent from the
      est, but implicitly part of its textual material.  This saves a lot
      of memory, perticularly since many of them will be a single character.
      So when one needs to be removed, it is done, perversely, by inserting
      a <emphasis>delete modifier</emphasis>  This is a leading modifier containing the
      fsno of the insertion token.  It specifies that the token is not to
      be inserted.  It can also apply to a line break.  Unlike any other
      kind of modifier, it also gives an ending fmtno, so one modifier can
      delete multiple fsnos.  
    </para>

    <para>
      In &schutz; terminlogy, a <emphasis>newline</emphasis> causes
      textual display to start on the next line.  But unlike a carriage return,
      multiple newlines, concatentated with nothing visible in between, only
      cause moving to the next line once.  One might say concatenation of
      newlines in idempotent.  A newline can be inserted by a line
      break, or by certain modifiers.  
    </para>

    <para>
      A <emphasis>blank line mod</emphasis> is a leading modifier that specifies
      insertion of two or more new lines, but there is implicitly one
      or more lines of white but nonempty space between then, so they
      are not concatenated in the way described above.  It is the only
      way to get blank lines to display.
    </para>

    <para>
      There are four kinds of comment modifiers, a two-by-two cartesian
      product.  They can be fixed, which are not moved horizontally, or
      movable, which are, tracking motion of syntactic material that
      results from editing, parsing, relayout, etc.  They can be leading
      or trailing.  Trailing comment modifiers are the only trailing
      modifiers at all.  These are comments
      that occur to the right of all syntactic material on the line.
      In general, a comment modifier can have a newline at its beginning
      and/or its end. 
    </para>

    <para>
      When the user types new or altered text, which has yet to be reparsed,
      I <emphasis>text modifier</emphasis> gets inserted.  All text altered or touched by
      a contiguous group of edits is removed from the est in the ways described
      above.  Then any alterted text is inserted as a text modifier.  It
      resembles a comment modifier, but will be rescanned and reparsed
      upon request from the user.  It can have a newline at its beginning
      and/or its end.  
    </para>

    <para>
      A <emphasis>token modifier</emphasis> is used so as not to lose user-typed
      text that the parser suggests deleting, as part of its syntax
      repair.  The token can have a large complement of leading and trailing modifiers
      as well as its own text, if a &varterm;.
      A token modifier is actually a mini-est with one root and children like a
      single fsno would have. 
    </para>

    <para>
      There are additional modifier kinds for a few kinds of messages
      and text not recognized by the scanner.
    </para>

    <para>
      The children of an est node are kept in an array of <emphasis>leaf
      elements</emphasis>, which have additional fields beside the obvious
      pointer to the child node.  One is the fsno of the child.  This
      is a property that is meaningful only in the context of the
      parent node, so belongs here.  Another is a cumulative count of
      nodes in the child subtree and all child subtrees to its right.
      The subscripts of the children increase right-to-left, and the
      cumulative node counts also reflect this.  This ordering
      complements reductions during LR parsing.  The meaning of this
      depends partly on the parent node too.  Finally, there is a set
      of property bits, used to locate desired nodes in O(logN) time.
    </para>

    <para>
      Most of the manipulation of ests operates at a level of abstraction
      where in interior node appears to have a flat list with a
      variable number of children.  However, there are many places
      this would require linear-time search through the children, which in
      some cases, will be longish.  Instead, at a lower level, a single
      est node and its children are actually represented by a <emphasis>K tree</emphasis>.
      After the initial development of the K tree data structure, it
      was pointed out that the term K tree was in use with another meaning,
      so they were renamed <emphasis>Sequence trees</emphasis> in later literature.
      But "KTree" was already in extensive use in the the code of &schutz;,
      so has been retained there.
    </para>

    <para>
      A K tree is a multi-level tree of nodes with variable child count,
      ranging up to a small static maximum, here eight.  All paths to leaves
      are the same length.  It represents a sequence of anything, with no
      search keys.  Elements are identified only by their position in
      the sequence.  It allows cutting out a subsequence or slice and
      concatenation of sequences in logarighmic time in the sequence length.
      It works functionally, i.e., with immutable and shared nodes, thus
      requiring a garbage collector.  
    </para>

    <para>
      In pure form, slicing, concatenating, and a few other operations
      are implemented as independent operations.  However, in &schutz;,
      there is a set of composite operatoins for building a K tree by
      concatenating, right-to-left, multiple slices of other K trees.
      Moreover, during such a build, a portion of the partially
      constructed tree is maintained in temporary, mutable data
      structures.  This avoids a potentially large amount of
      allocation, copying, and garbage production in achieving the
      desired result.
    </para>

    <para>
      The physical data structure integrates est trees and K trees.
      There is a cartesian product of nodes that are leaf/nonleaf K
      tree nodes, and est parent/est children.
    </para>

    <para>
      Since a K tree node has a limited out degree, its children can
      be searched efficiently.  Even then, a binary search can be
      performed on its children.  Thus a search through an entire est
      can be done in logarithmic time.
    </para>

    <para>
      Aside from systematic traversal of an entire est, there are two
      methods of locating a desired node in an est.  One is for
      locating a node with some interesting property.  Each est node a
      set of <emphasis>kind bits</emphasis>.  This is a fixed set of bits, each
      denoting an interesting node property.
      Each est node holds bits
      for all properties found anywhere in its subtree.  Thus finding
      the next/previous leaf node with a desired property, it is
      possible to descend thereto, by looking for a child containing
      the propery, in logarithmic time.  Complete kind bit sets are
      maintained when building ests.
    </para>

    <para>
      The other locating mechanism is through
      node numbering.  Conceptially, all the nodes are numbered in a
      preorder, i.e., parent node first, then its child subtrees, in
      left-to-right order.  Physically each interior est node contains
      only the count of the nodes in the subtree it roots, including
      itself.  One one hand, this means there a node can be shared
      among mutiple ests, since it does not contain inherited
      information.  On the other hand, it is possible to do a top-down
      traversal, developing full node numbers along the way.
    </para>

    <para>
      With this any explicit node can be located by its global node
      number.  Implicit items, i.e., the insertion tokens and line
      breaks, can be identified by number of a nearby node, plus the
      fsno of the implicit item.  In the case of a new line given by a
      modifier that can contain one before and one after, an
      additional boolean will suffice.
    </para>

    <para>
      The global node number  mechanism is used to denote beginnings of text lines
      in an est.  When there are multiple new lines concatenated, the
      rightmost is always the one identified in this way.  For a blank
      line modifier that denotes more than one blank line, a line
      number withih the modifier is additionally used.
    </para>

    <para>
      Interior points within a line, such as the typein cursor,
      selection limits, bookmarks, etc. are identified in the same
      way, except a character position within the item is also
      required.
    </para>

    <para>
      During reparsing, another mechanism is required.  Fragments of
      the est are being
      moved around independently, and global node numbers will not be
      meaningful.  Prior to reparsing, a mark on an est leaf node is
      converted to a pointer directly to the node, node kind bits are
      inserted into the est that lead to each such pointed-to leaf node.
      These are called tempmarks, for <emphasis>temporary marks</emphasis>.
    </para>

    <para>

      During rescanning, tree traversal, and reparsing there is a rather complex
      scheme of patching this kind of mark to follow the material it
      denotes.  Finally, when the reparse is done, they are converted back
      to the the global node number kind of marks, using the kind bits
      to locate them.  This is a fragile mechanism, but seems necessary to
      keep track of marked points during reparsing.  
    </para>

    <para>
      There is special treatment of est nodes that represent lists
      of varying numbers of syntactic children, all of the same class,
      e.g., a list of declarations or formal parameters.  The usual way
      of representing these uses a left- or right-recursive production,
      which has the consequence that the list portion of the ast amounts
      to a linear linked list of the elements.  In &schutz;, this is undesirable
      for two reasons.  First, it undermines the logarithmic time operations.
      This is particularly important, because it is mainly through ever
      longer lists of statements that edited programs become large.  
    </para>

    <para>
      Secondly, when doing incremental reparsing out in the middle of a
      list, this would require a lot of allocation and copying of otherwise
      unchanged nodes, just to alter their effective link pointer.
    </para>

    <para>
      Instead, the est node for a list has all the children, i.e., the
      list elements, flattened into direct children of the est node.
      If the list is long, the K tree mechanism inside will balance
      the children and maintain logarithmic operations, regardless of
      which children are changed and which left alone.  Moreover, it
      also allows the parsing grammer to use an ambiguous left-and-right
      recursive production, so the parser can leave untouched children
      alone, again regardless of their location in the list.  Building
      the est child list during a reduction flattens the right had side
      of the production, so the ambiguity doesn't matter. 
    </para>

    <para>
      To make the format syntax numbering and conditional formtting work
      in a list, the fsrule/fstree has exactly one leaf that is an est
      child, for the list element.  This can occur somewhere in the middle
      of the fs children.  The numbering starts with zero for this, continues
      righttward, wraps around to the left, then rightward to the list element.
      Traversing the fstree wraps around too, visiting all the fs children
      for each ast child.
    </para>

    <para>
      Sometimes a list element needs to be omitted from the corresponding
      est but some insertion tokens and/or line breaks remain.  Since the
      fsnos of est children keep going around, this can create ambiguities
      in the fsno matchup between the fstree an the est children.  When this
      is possible, an explicit but dummy ast child is inserted into the
      est, to mark the place of the omitted child.  It generates no syntactic
      or textual content.
    </para>

    <para>
      Decisions about whether to take a horizontal line break are made
      without traversing, with the aid of <emphasis>width info</emphasis>, a
      collection of information about the space occupied by the text
      of an est node.  This is complicated by the fact that, in
      addition to a simple character count, it can involve new lines
      at the beginning or end of the text, new lines properly inside,
      which are different, and the presence of material with a
      absolute start position, which some comments have.  Width info
      distils needed information, independent of start position, and
      in a way that can be synthesized, bottom-up.
    </para>

    <para>
      For leaf est nodes,
      it is computed when needed, directly from the node.  For interior est nodes,
      it is computable from the width info of the children, and is stored
      in the node when it is created.  This entails a concatenation operation
      on width info values, along with insertion of requires white space
      between children.  A start position and a width info value can be
      used later to ascertain how far right node's text will extend.
    </para>

    <para>
      For a fill line break, some traversal is unavoidable, but although
      it is a bit complex algorithmically, it need not traverse very far, so it
      is not too computationally demanding.  
    </para>

  </sect1>
</article><!-- Schutz data structures. --> 
